## Amartya Sen's Capability Theory

- Amartya Sen's interest in famine and malnourishment grew up from a very personal experience.
- As a 9 year old boy he witnessed the Bengal famine of 1943, in which 3 million people perished.
- He felt that this loss of lives was unnecessary. 
- He believed there was an adequate food supply at that time but the distribution of food for particular groups of people like rural labourers was unequal.
- In his book entitled Poverty and Famines that was published in 1981, he revealed that in many cases of famine, food supplies are not significantly reduced.
- Instead, a number of social and economic factors such as rising food crises and food distribution systems lead to starvation among certain groups in society.
- In the Ethiopian Famine of 1972-1974, between 50,000 to 2,00,000 people died. In the Bangladesh famine of 1974, as many as 1 lakh people may have died of malnutrition and starvation withing 2-3 months.
- Amartya Sen investigated these famines for his research, and the remarkable conclusion of the investigation was that food availability decline was not a very important factor in explaining how famines occur.
- In both the bengal famine and bangladesh famine there was sufficient food available.
- This is where he talks about entitlement, where individuals with certain ownerships can exchange them for opportunities.
- Food insecurity happens when people who cannot access adequate food irrespective of food availability in the markets, because in such cases, there is no technical reason for the market to meet subsistence needs.

### Claims
There are two claims that the capability theory provides us.
1. In any society the freedom to achieve well being is of primary importance.
2. The freedom to achieve well-being must be understood in relation to their capabilities.
3. Individuals can differ greatly in their abilities to convert resources into opportunities.
4. Evaluation of justice, liberty, and most importantly how well people are doing must seem to be as open minded as possible.