## Revolutionary Theory

- It was born in the Early 19th century, in the aftermath of the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution.
- The industrial revolution with its application of science and technology, led to rising productivity and a new factory system of production.
- The French Revolution created a whole new political order based on equality, liberty, freedom and democracy.

### Features

- It says social change is inevitable and human societies would be moving to a primitive to an advanced state.
- The attainment of the advanced state is always good because it represents progress and civilization.
- But the rate of social change is slow and gradual

## Functionalist Theory

- The functionalist theorists pointed out that human societies are like a biological organism
- Just like different parts of the biological organism corresponds to each other, similarly the institutions in a society such as the economic and political institutions are closely related to each other.
### Functions
- There are **4 kinds of functions** the are extremely important
1. Environmental adaptation
2. Goal attainment
3. Integration
4. Latency

## Modernization Theory

### Marian Levy's Theory

- Marian Levy's modernization theory is based on the distinction between relatively modernized societies and relatively non modernized societies.
- Levy considers Great Britain, Japan and United States to represent modernized societies, and countries like India to be examples of relatively non modernized societies.

- The **non modernized societies** are characterized by
	1. Low degree of specialization
	2. High level of self sufficiency
	3. Cultural norms of tradition
	4. Particularism
	5. Functional Diffuseness
	6. There is little emphasis on money, circulation and market.

- In contrast, the **relatively modernized societies** are characterized by 
	1. High degree of specialization
	2. Cultural norms of rationality
	3. Universalism
	4. Functional specificity
	5. High degree of centralization
	6. Greater emphasis on money, circulation and market
	7. Leads to the development of bureaucracy 

### Neil Smeltzer's Theory

- For Neil Smeltzer, modernization involves structural differentiation, because through the modernization process, a structure that performed multiple functions becomes divided into many specialized structures that perform one function each
- An example of structural differentiation is the family institution
- In the past, the traditional family was large and multigenerational with relatives living together under one roof.
- In the modern society, the family institution has undergone differentiation, it is now small and nuclear.
- The modern family has lost a lot of its old functions. For example, the corporate institution has taken over the employment function. The formal educational institution now provides schooling, and the government looks after the welfare responsibilities.
- These new institutions and roles coordinate the differentiated structures.

## Ferdinand Tonnies: Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft

- **Gemeinschaft**: Traditional Societies
- **Gesellschaft**: Modern Societies
## Rostow's Evolutionary Ladder

- There are 5 major stages of economic development beginning with the traditional society and ending with the high mass consumption society.
- At first the society is stationary with little social change.
- Then it begins to change. The rise of new entrepreneurs, the expansions of markets, development of new industries and so on.
- In this society there is little momentum for self sustained growth, because the large population has consumed all the economic surplus.
- A stimulus has to be provided to restructure major institutions through technological innovation.
- Finally there is a drive to maturity where economic and cultural factors are leading to prosperity.
- And in the final stage, there is high mass consumption, growth of employment opportunities, increase in national income, rise of consumer demands and formation of a stronger market.