- United nations economic commission for Latin America, which was largely formulated with the objective of promoting economic cooperation among countries.
- The dependency school first arose in Latin America as a response to the bankruptcy of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America in the early 1960's.
- Many populist regimes in Latin America tried a developmental strategy of industrialization, but in the early 1960's, Latin America started to become plagued by numerous problems.
- The problems were largely inflation, unemployment, currency devaluation, declining trade, and other economic problems.

### Andre Gunder Frank
- Andre Gunder Frank who happened to be in Latin America in the early 1960's, played a very important role in spreading the ideas of dependency school to the rest of the world. Problems like economic stagnation, and political issues came to the forefront during the 1960's.
- Andre Gunder Frank provided a critique of the Modernization School. [[L3#Modernization School of Thought]].
- According to Frank, most of the theories and developmental policies in the Modernization School reflected the sentiments of European and North American capitalist nations.
- It is strange that the modernization school does not at all discuss colonialism, which totally restructured the third world countries and altered their path of development. 
- The historical experience of colonialism and foreign domination reversed the development of many third world countries and forced them to move along the path of economic backwardness.