## Dos Santos: The Structure of Dependence

- The theory of imperialism focuses on the expansion and domination of imperial powers. In a similar way the concept of dependence highlights the fundamental problems experienced by underdeveloped countries.
- Dos Santos points out that the relationship between two or more countries assumes the form of dependence when some countries(the dominant ones) can expand themselves and can be self serving, while the other countries(the dependent ones) can do this only as a reflection of that expansion. 
- He argues that the relationship between the dominant and dependent countries are unequal because the development of the former takes place at the expense of the latter.
- Through monopolistic control of the market and through the export of capital in financial relations, there is a transfer of surplus from dependent countries to dominant ones.

## Immanuel Wallerstein: The World System Theory

- In order to rethink the critical issues that emerged out of the changing world economy over the last two decades, Immanuel Wallerstein developed a new world system perspective.
- The world system perspective developed inspiration within a new generation of sociologists and it introduced a specific zone known as the semi-periphery, which can fit those nation states that are neither in the core not in the periphery.
- He argues that the world right now is too complicated to be classified as a bimodal system.
- In response to the decline in comparative costs of production in the core countries, individual capitalists must be able to transfer capital from a leading sector to a rising sector, and in order to trade in both directions.
- A distinctive feature of the semi-peripheral countries is that the nation state has a direct and immediate interest in controlling the domestic market.

## Environmental Development

- In 1983, the UN established the world commission on environmental and development which become known as Brundtland Commission, after the name of the Prime Minister of Norway, Gro Harlem Brundtland.
- The commission wads given the responsibility to re-examine the critical environment and development problems and to formulate realistic proposals to solve them.
- The report of the Brundtland commission entitled "Our Common Future" was published in the year 1987. 
- It concentrated on 6 main areas
	1. Population growth
	2. Food security
	3. Species and Ecosystems
	4. Energy
	5. Industry
	6. Urbanization
- The commission recognized that all of these are interconnected and cannot be treated in isolation from one another.
- The report also came up with the definition of sustainable development where sustainable means lasting and development implies growth.
- The report pointed out that two basic aspirations in the society have to be reconciled:
	1. Achieving economic development.
	2. Protecting the environment.
- Conservation of natural resources and protection of the environment are crucial to achieving sustainable development.
- The main purpose of sustainable development therefore is to raise the standard of living particularly among the disadvantaged classes without reducing the standard of living of future generations.