## The IPCC

- The IPCC also talks about the global changes. They predict that there is more than a 50% chance of the temperature rise crossing 1.5 degrees C till 2040.
- The IPCC is suggesting that the world must rapidly shift away from burning fossil fuels which occupies a prime position in contributing to climate crises.
- We also need an urgent system wide transformation to secure a net 0 climate resilient future.
- Deep emission cuts are necessary across the society to combat climate crises.
- Power generation buildings, industries and transport are responsible for about 80% of the global emissions, while other land use activities account for the remainder.
- Deep decarbonation is required to limit local temperature rise to 1.5 degrees C.
- This would require growing emphasis on trees which can sequester and store carbon.

### The reason for changing our developmental approach:
- In the year 2011, the western ghats ecology expert panel that is chaired by the internationally renowned ecologist Madhav Gadgil submitted a report to the Indian Ministry of Environment and Forests.
- The report warned that unplanned development is impacting the sustainability of the Western Ghats hill chain, which is one of the worlds most biodiverse areas. The report warned that a number of states, including Karnataka and Kerala have to limit activities such as making constructions near forests and hilly areas.
- However the report was rejected by both the ministry and the states.
- Ignoring these expert recommendations resulted in the worst flood damage that took place in those areas where the committee recommended protection.

- Some cities are seeking to reverse the trend of unplanned development. For instance, Nairobi conducted an extensive demolition drive by rejecting and uprooting a large number of redundant buildings that were built on land that were choking the flow of water and contributing to severe annual floods.
- The focus therefore must be on long term restoration projects that can reverse some of the ecological damage leading to the current situation.
- But such learning should not be confined to the areas that have experienced the worst. The rest of the world has much to learn as well. 